Each wing or floor has its own Resident Assistant. These upper-class or graduate students plan programs for the wing and the building, serve as a resource for residents, and help to create and maintain an environment conducive to academic, personal, and social growth. RA duties include various administrative functions, desk and on call shifts, and a variety of other obligations. RAs are also responsible for the enforcement of Housing policies and the documentation of policy violations. Residents should contact their RAs first with any questions or problems. If the RA cannot personally help the resident, he or she will direct the resident to someone who can. RAs report to the Hall Director.

Hall Directors and Assistant Hall Directors are full-time, live in staff and are responsible for the operation of the residence halls. They supervise the other hall staff members, coordinate hall functions, advise the hall associations, monitor hall maintenance and cleanliness, provide assistance to residents, uphold community standards through the discipline process when necessary, and perform administrative functions as needed. Residents who have special problems or who have ideas for hall programs or other hall improvements should see their Hall Director. Hall Directors report to the Associate Director for Residence Life.

The custodians keep public areas of the building clean. Residents should help keep their surroundings attractive by cleaning up after themselves and not abusing the facilities available to them. Custodians report directly to the Custodial Supervisors.

Each hall has its own Facility Assistant. The FAs perform minor maintenance tasks and seek to make the halls’ environments relaxing and beautiful through beautification projects. These student employees also serve as couriers by helping Housing move furniture and other supplies into and around the halls. The FAs work cooperatively with the hall staff to see that the facility needs of the building are met. FAs report directly to the Coordinator for Building Services.

Each hall has its own Housing Ambassador, and their room serves as the hall’s tour room. These upper-class students give hall tours, represent Housing at University functions, answer questions via telephone and email, and help students with Housing payments. HAs report directly to the Coordinator for Business Operations in the Assignments and Collections office.