1. Staff (Non-Faculty) Members. “Staff (non-faculty) members” are persons employed
primarily for work other than academic teaching.
Procedures and Responsibilities.
1. Staff members include the following divisions for purposes of University structure,
compensation/classification, and benefits:
1.01 Regular Staff Members.
Regular staff members are those individuals in regular salaried appointments as
defined by Policy 1.3.2, “Types of Staff Appointments,” and are one of the
following:
a. Administrative Officials: All individuals in regular salaried appointments
to positions carrying duties and responsibilities involving management
and direction of the University, or a major division or department of the
University. Positions in this group meet the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board requirements for Optional Retirement Program
eligibility and are considered non-classified staff. Inclusion in this group
shall be designated by the Chancellor/President or by his/her designee.
b. Professional Non-Classified Staff Members: All individuals in regular
salaried appointments to positions requiring advanced specialized
academic or professional training. Positions in this group meet the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board requirements for Optional
Retirement Program eligibility unless specifically designated otherwise,
and are considered non-classified staff. Included in this group are
Librarians, Physicians, Coaches, institute and center Directors, Research
Scientists, Research Professors, etc. Inclusion in this group shall be
designated by the Chancellor/President or by his/her designee.
c. Classified Staff Members: All individuals in regular salaried appointments
to positions classified within the University Pay Plan under the section
entitled “Classified Titles and Salary Ranges” and assigned to a specified
salary range (pay grade) as defined by the Pay Plan. Positions in this
group confer eligibility for the Teacher Retirement System. Classified
position responsibilities and duties may include administrative,
professional, para-professional and technical, office and clerical, skilled
crafts, service, and/or police work. Inclusion in this group shall be all
regular staff not designated as either administrative officials or nonclassified professional staff members.
